simple  is not easy  to say something is simple  does not mean  that it's easily done  to recognize  that when you pray you're talking to  nobody but yourself  that's simple  for a whole lot of people  it's not easy for a whole lot of people  there's a sentimental attachment to the  idea that the universe was created  by a kind  noble infinitely intelligent spirit that  cares about you  and to let go of that delusion  it may be simple  but it's not easy  conversely for those of us who have  taken that step for those of us who have  figured it out and who have the  detachment and self-confidence to really  live with the ramifications to really  take it on board okay  everything my parents told me was i  everything my grandparents told me was  like quite possibly if you went to a  religious school  everything my school teachers told me  was a lie and to look back at the last 1  000 years of history  and recognize the depth  and scale  of the deception and perception that's  been going on recognize wow  decade after decade century after  century  these lies have gone  on and on and here i am standing at the  end of this  process having undeceived myself  but having having enlightened myself  and  oh  my own father  can't  i assume you sat down and talked to your  father  he can't because he won't  or he won't because he can't and and now  are you gonna start feeling that you're  smarter  than your own father are you gonna start  feeling that you're smarter than your  own school teachers your own university  professors maybe all of the authority  figures you looked up to in your whole  entire life it's very easy  for  atheists to become in this way beguiled  by a sense of their own specialness  their own extraordinariness their own  intellectual superiority over the people  who matter to them most within their own  family within their own school within  their own social milieu and yes again  when you look back  over the centuries  everyone else seems to think that sir  isaac newton was a very brilliant man i  don't think so  i think i'm smarter  than sir isaac newton  have you seen what he has to say about  religion  have you seen what he has to say about  the bible if you take some time  to read sir isaac newton's religious  views you might start feeling like a  genius yourself and that you're looking  down at sir isaac newton as a little  teeny tiny intellectual ant compared to  your enormity so this is an ego trip  here that atheists can get pulled into  you ever heard of blaze pascal  brilliant mathematician  if you read what he has to say  about religion about god about faith  you might start feeling that you are  quite a bit more brilliant than blaise  pascal and it goes all the way back for  centuries all the great men  celebrated in history kings queens  emperors  um scientists as i've mentioned i mean  perhaps it's most extraordinary perhaps  it's least extraordinary that includes  scientists explorers  all of these people  right  but the truth is  atheism  remains simple  even if  for 99 of people  it's not easy it's not easy to accept  it's not easy and in fact the fact  figuring out  this one thing and really accepting it  that when you pray  nobody's listening to you and let's  let's just give one further illustration  what i mean by atheism in this context  because we're really talking not just  about atheism but  anti-religionism if you like because  atheism can mean different things  different  contexts but here we really mean atheism  specifically as one aspect of developing  a hardened disciplined attitude of  opposing religion of all kinds not for  example a form of atheism that embraces  worshiping the ghosts of your deceased  ancestors because there are there are  some  religions within which you could be an  atheist and nevertheless an utterly  religious person  um  all your life  in the same way that people told you it  was  good to pray  you were probably told it was good to  believe  you know  the doctor may have given you medicine  and told you how important it was to  believe in the therapy to believe in  treatment  and now if you're really an atheist if  you're really a nihilist say what do you  mean why do i have to believe in it  if it works i don't have to believe in  it  if toothpaste works you as a doctor can  handle someone say i don't give a [ __ ]  if you believe in this or not it doesn't  matter if you believe this nothing could  matter to me less whether or not you  believe in this because i know  the effects of toothpaste and that's all  there is to it but very often that's not  the kind of  scientific  milia  we grow up in we grew up being told you  have to believe in yourself you have to  believe in your teachers you have to  believe in  studying for the test you have put to  believe in trying your hardest you have  to believe in the medicine believe in  the therapy  believe in your father believe in your  little brother  believe in the army believe in winning  war we saw a sign today talking about  praying  for the the soldiers in the current war  that's being fought in 2022. oh prayer  you think that'll help you know believe  believe believe so it's one thing to  take that step back and realize when you  pray  you're talking to no one about yourself  well when you believe  what is it  that you're doing  exactly that's simple  okay it's not easy  the problem is though as much as we may  be inclined to start thinking of  ourselves as intellectual extraordinary  people individually as atheists or  collectively like however many thousand  or however many million we add up to the  truth is atheists are not  extraordinarily intelligent people  they're not  it would be very interesting to try to  detail try to study quantitatively  measure and qualitatively evaluate who  are the atheists in any given society  who stands up to be counted as an  atheist in iran in saudi arabia in  israel  in ireland in italy  in new york city and so on you know and  you probably could do some research and  start to come to some conclusions about  the type of person who in one context or  another doesn't just passively become an  atheist but as i say i'm really talking  about becoming anti-religion  anti-religious rather than religious  with atheism being one component of  those anti-clerical anti-establishment  and it's what kind of person does that  i'll tell you something  the 20th century was not a really long  time ago  a whole lot of people who were atheists  supported and made excuses for joseph  stalin  how [ __ ] stupid do you have to be in  the 20th century to make excuses for and  support joseph's talent  this set back the atheist movement by  centuries all right think of  the intellectual potential the atheist  movement the way in which those people's  individual lives were ruined by  communism and the way in which any  possible atheist movement as a whole was  really discredited  by communism right  mao zedong  could repeat the same  story right now even within japan  let's  study this particular history can study  the history of communism within japan so  we're not talking about a christian  context but a huge percentage of the  people who stood up and said they  represented a more rational  anti-religious atheist future  they supported joseph stalin they  supported houston they supported  communism in some cases they literally  walked over the border to go join the  soviet union to go move to the atheist  paradise as they thought of it because  of the association between  uh communism and and atheism okay  so this thing  it's simple  but it's not easy  and it has this deceptive  dangerous  quality of making us feel  special making us feel empowered of  making us feel extraordinarily  intelligent and well well-informed and  we're not  all right  let's look on youtube  jacqueline glenn  the amazing atheist  all right look at the guys who publish  these books look at sam  harris okay  these are unbelievably  stupid people  and i do get messages from you guys  every so often probably someone's going  to say it during this live stream i get  my people saying hey why don't you do a  live stream with you know sam harris why  don't you do a podcast with sam harris  why don't you do an interview with the  amazing atheist like no okay not  jacqueline clinton nobody suggests that  but i do i do get messages  oh wow there's  good moon in mentions armored skeptic  wow  wow that guy's an idiot okay yeah  they're incredibly stupid people here on  youtube  uh  and they've made atheism almost their  their primary identity right their  calling card you know what everyone said  their identity as an activist their  their cause you know  um  [Music]  [Laughter]  sorry i was digressing from saying  you may  ask me  why don't you collaborate with these  people why don't they  collaborate with you i think that is  the reason why i think  sam harris  as accomplished as he is as uh  wealthy as he is so on and so forth i  think he would be intimidated to talk to  me about buddhism to talk to me about  hinduism but quite possibly to talk to  you about anything about democracy in  america about  any conceivable topic i don't think sam  harris is my fault we own a couple of  his books here i did a book review if  you dig back on my channel i did a  review of one of his books years ago we  have another one of his books that we  got for free you know i don't have to  hold it up but you know i just say it's  not a completely uninformed opinion on  my part and i have made videos uh  criticizing this position in detail so  let's stay on sam harris just to  illustrate this point a step further so  that the first example i gave you and  this is with all due humility and i'll  do self-criticism okay i know what it's  like to want to believe these things i  know what it's like to want to believe  that there's a god i know what it's like  to want to believe in a religion  without believing in a god i've been  through both right i was involved with  terabyte of buddhism really orthodox  philosophical profound therapeutic like  the deep end of buddhism not the shallow  hippie end of buddhism right so i know i  know what both of those are like i know  what it's like to want to believe in a  religion with a god i know what it's  like to want to believe in a religion  without a god okay  my parents  were communist  fanatics communist extremists not  moderate or ironical communists you know  um  so i i know what it was like to kind of  be forced to believe in communism by  your parents and to try to  try to get along with the family  religion you could talk about it exactly  what age i started rebelling against  that or was seeing how crazy and  nonsensical my parents police were cause  for me  uh it was kind of perpetually falling  apart um  [Music]  anyway  and i was always very good at seeing my  parents  weaknesses that way seeing what it was  put it this way seeing what it was they  wanted to believe but couldn't believe  themselves seeing the brittleness of  their own belief in communism and and  criticizing them for it and seeing how  they react so just over the dinner table  i already had this well-informed  perspective that  this ideology my parents were committed  to  was wasn't entirely functional even  even for them um  okay  if we think we're so brilliant if we  think we have some tremendous  intellectual advantage over members of  religion as atheists  um  [Music]  if you were to do a survey in the united  states of america right now in 2022  who has a  higher rate  of psychedelic drug use  i'm going to narrow that question down  who believes in  lsd  atheists  or  religious people  who has a higher rate of not just using  lsd  but believing in lsd who has a higher  rate of using ayahuasca and believing in  ayahuasca right and we can go through a  long list of from my perspective  crazy  hippie spiritual beliefs  i was just spiritual crazy  pseudo-scientific  beliefs and you were going to find the  atheists are just as desperate to  believe in them as as members of  mainstream religions or that they're  more desperate to believe in them that  for some reason christians muslims and  jews aren't reaching out for lsd they  aren't reaching out for ayahuasca in the  same way that atheists are and  admittedly these are minority  persuasions we're talking about it's not  it's not the case that lsd has an  enormous cult following in the united  states america but it's it's significant  the people who really believe in uh how  we want to put the psychedelic uh drug  use psychedelic drug therapy uh so on  and so forth now you know we go through  a number of other things you might think  faith healing is only associated with  the religious to a remarkable extent  it's associated with atheists you can go  through all these you know  beliefs that people cling to and you  know one i'm i'm open-minded about um  who has more belief in  antidepressants  in psychiatric drugs  we just had mentioned here mounin  mentioned armored skeptic so years ago i  made a video criticizing him on exactly  this issue he identifies as a skeptic  what he says about  antidepressants prozac ssri drugs these  these types of drugs  there's no skepticism in it  he's dogmatic in the truest that's what  he is a believer he believes in these  thought-terminating cliches  trust your doctor  [Laughter]  ask your doctor to vote trust your  doctor your quote unquote your mind has  a chemical imbalance you know what i  mean all this all this crap and you see  how  thin  their commitment to skepticism is and  you see how you know the fact that they  had some quality in them that let them  you know let go of their attachment to  prayer let them let go of their belief  in a in a creator god that the world is  some divine plan they had something to  let them do that right and yet they're  still clinging to all of these other  beliefs including quite likely prozac if  not lsd they want to believe in drugs  they want to believe in science  their idea of science really is a kind  of religion it's at best pseudoscience  they have religious attitudes that show  up in other parts of their lives now  what i'm about to say to you  some of you will find this hard to  visualize and some of you know right  away what i'm talking about  have you known anyone who was an atheist  who was an anti-religious  anti-clerical atheist and was an atheist  and rejected  organized religion thoroughly  and you hated black people  have you known someone who was an  atheist  and for no religious reason whatsoever  they hated homosexuals  now i'm going to just narrow in to put a  human face on it  let's say you knew someone  and you considered them a highly  intelligent person with modern atheist  values but they were specifically racist  when it came to miscegenation meaning  people getting married and having  children who are from different races  have you known  a black american woman  who intensely hated  black women who married  white men  oh now it has a human face now before we  were talking about racism as an abstract  concept now we're talking about a per a  particular person with a particular kind  of experience in life and they will  often say to you in a self-effacing way  well look this is just my experience  when i was going through college all of  the girls who like they're gonna have  whatever justification for but that can  be a really intensely felt racism and it  may be based on jealousy it may be based  on supernatural beliefs  have you so here's here's an example  i've seen up up close in person have you  ever met a white woman  living in asia  who intensely hates  white men  who choose to be with asian women  rather than for example being with  her these are examples of of racism now  i could go on and on have you met  chinese people who are racist against  mongolians have you met cambodian people  who are racist against vietnamese people  so my point is you know  it's very easy to presume  that  atheists and the people who in an  extraordinary way with with real daring  stand up to their own parents and say no  this is wrong and in a sense they turn  around and look back at the last  thousand years and they're willing to  accept this this whole period of  millennia but at least one thousand  years this is all error this is all  wrong it might be very beginning to  think these people are extraordinarily  intelligent there's something really  excellent about these people now i would  make the claim  that  the most intelligent people  in every society  will question  will challenge will overturn the lies  that society is predicated upon all  right so the foundational myths  the mythology  the lies that  created  and perpetuated and sustained the  society they're born into  the most intelligent people will  question those things will challenge  them will overturn  all right i don't know how someone can  be born and raised in the united states  of america  and not question what they were taught  in school about the american revolution  but this is typical all these people who  think they're they're brilliant  they will point their finger and say  look at those russians all they hear is  propaganda from vladimir putin they  never question it isn't this pathetic  look at these russians who only hear one  side of the story oh i'm sorry have you  read anything written by british united  empire loyalists  have you read one pamphlet one lecture  have you read the perspective of just  one person who argued  that the american independence movement  was wrong  ever  99.9 percent of americans have never  done this  even people with phds they've never  thought hmm  it's possible  that when thomas paine was writing a  propaganda pamphlet in the middle of a  civil war he might have been a little  bit dishonest or misleading in what is  overtly  a work of propaganda  let me just ask does it take a genius  who is going to question this who is  going to again regardless of what the  lies are the lies that  created the society you're in that  promulgated promoted  sustain you know the social norms  what kind of person in france  questions the myth of napoleon i don't i  don't think i have to go into details  there which i think you're aware  napoleon is presented as this great hero  you start asking questions you start  looking under rocks have any of them  read the perspective of just one person  who was anti-napoleon from whichever  perspective have you have you thought  about it that way and there isn't just  one perspective there isn't just sorry i  should stay with the american revolution  for one second there isn't just one  perspective from which the american  revolution should be cross-examined and  criticized so i just mentioned the  british basically the pro  the royalist position the people who  were loyal to the king of england that's  one perspective okay what about black  people did they have a perspective what  about mexican people in the spanish  empire did they have a perspective  what about first nations and indigenous  people do they have a perspective what  about roman catholics in quebec they  like we can we can keep going here right  what about people so here's an  interesting one i have a couple books on  this what about people who  really wanted democracy  that's another interesting fight what  are the people who didn't support the  american constitution  because it wasn't democratic enough or  they argued it wasn't democratic at all  that's an interesting perspective i've  done that reading i'm sorry but 99.9  percent of americans they've never even  imagined that that perspective exists oh  what there were people  there were people who said the american  revolution and the constitution that's  really not democratic  there were people who actually kept  fighting  after the revolution  ended  because from their perspective they said  the revolution isn't over yet we haven't  won yet we don't have democracy  did you know that  this is one  example and and  of course religion is an important part  of that history but i've intentionally  used what's what's thought of  as a non-religious example so yeah i do  think  the most intelligent people in any  society the distant intellectuals they  have to question  the lies that society is predicated upon  and religion is  just one kind of lie it may not be the  only lie it may not be the most  important lie we are living if you are  born and raised in beijing china  there are a whole lot of lies for you to  question that created and sustained the  regime in communist china and religion  is  relatively low on the list religion's  part of it too but it's a religion isn't  as important in that critique in china  as it would be if you were born in syria  if you were born in even iraq this  democracy you know have in iraq right  imagine  imagine someone who was born in iraq  just 10 years ago  and what they're growing up with  being told about the difference between  sunni and shiite  and how much that matters to everyone in  their family how much it matters in the  newspaper every like contemporary  politics and you're growing up right now  in iraq imagine what it takes to really  recognize  this is all  [ __ ]  and it's been [ __ ] for a thousand  years and it's still  [ __ ] now  okay  so in coming to the title of this video  in the thesis video it's a fairly  concise question i want to examine here  all right  you could have a very shallow and catty  approach to this catchphrase this  thought terminating uh cliche that quote  you're free to believe whatever you want  to believe  i i'm not going to talk about it in a  shallow and catty way i want to talk  about what's really profound  and i want to deal with the genealogy of  the concept  by which i really mean its origin in one  generation and how it changed from  generation to generation over time  what does it mean  to believe in freedom of religion what  does it mean to believe in freedom of  conscience  right what does it mean to believe in  freedom of belief  does it really mean oh you can believe  whatever you whatever you want to  believe and obviously already in the  title of this video i'm suggesting you  if you just stop and reflect on it for  one moment you can recognize  nobody  believes that  in our society in our world in this  dimension in this family  nobody  believes that you can and should believe  whatever you want to believe it's never  sincere so why do we all say it how has  that become  one of the foundational myths in our  study why is it become one of the  underpinning  you know big lives that our our society  is  is built upon okay  now  the origin  of the concept  right  freedom of conscience  freedom of religion freedom of belief  was very simply and very cynically an  attack on the catholic church  in europe the way we arrived at our  current set of pluralistic  political and religious assumptions was  by people assailing and criticizing the  catholic church and saying people should  have freedom of belief  freedom of conscience and what that  really meant in that period  this begins when martin luther is alive  all right so you guys may not know this  at one point martin luther is in the  same city as the the emperor of europe  as he called himself  it's an interesting thing at some at  some periods of time there's someone  calling himself emperor and sometimes  there isn't  this is not a king but an emperor and  that emperor had the ability to kill  um at that moment martin luther the  whole history of the world would be  different if he'd done it  should he kill martin luther should he  exercise  some kind of clemency or detachment so  obviously you guys know the decision was  made not to kill martin luther and uh  the emperor i'm sorry his name is escape  of mine right now  he published his own  philosophical  statement in defense of orthodoxy in  defense of  the catholic church and from what i know  it was basically ignored  martin luther's publications of that  time  they were wildly popular that he ended  up kind of defining the debate that  ensued over the reform of the catholic  church so as you know these things  happen simultaneously some people broke  away  and founded protestantism but other  people took the same  impulse and just tried to  reinvigorate the the catholic church rid  it of its uh forms of corruption or what  have you you know so you know  the original meaning of this kind of  idiom  freedom of belief freedom of conscience  right  the first step of it  was simply  to try to tolerate  protestantism within catholic europe  the second step uh oh here i get to use  a catchphrase for 2015.  ain't no fun when the rabbits got the  gun  [Laughter]  the second step  was to try to protect  catholics  against prosecution from  protestants right so both happened  although not quite simultaneously soon  enough  it wasn't just the fact that catholics  were or persecuting i should say  oppressing whatever you want to say  protestants actually you had scenarios  where instead it was the protestants of  persecuting and oppressing catholics  quite soon i think switzerland is the  first place this happened you had one  protestant sect mercilessly persecuting  oppressing another protestant sect just  over doctrinal differences of that kind  okay so this is this is step two  right  quote unquote tolerance now anyone yes  thank you charles v i didn't want to get  the number wrong yeah yeah thanks guys  so the the so-called emperor of europe  at that time and you guys can look at a  map of what he was and wasn't emperor of  he did not obviously revolve that was  chose the fifth right charles v i think  is much underrated today in his  historical significance but it's tough  for another video  anyway um  step two  it's very clear what we mean then and  obviously you know within england of  course as you know there were  you know periods of time when really  catholics were this  persecuted and oppressed all right okay  and then step  three  and this has changed our understanding  of freedom of belief freedom of  conscience so this day right was the  quakers  because now you got to tolerate people  who don't want to fight in your army  now you gotta tolerate people who don't  want to pay  taxes at least in time of war they don't  want to support  the military this kind of thing you have  people who are conscientious objectors  and they're an organized religious group  so the fear about catholics very  understandably was when you had a war  between protestant and catholic  the catholics are going to fight in the  catholic side and the protestants going  to fight in the present side  that was generally the case i mean  it wasn't this wasn't some kind of  baseless fear was that there were many  many contexts in which you know religion  mattered more than nationality and in  the complex  alliances within europe um you know when  england and spain and france and the  different bits and pieces of germany and  italy were all at war with each other  well a lot of times you know this kind  of fear that the catholics would be on  the catholic side prove to be true so  you know the basic question is could you  have a form of nationalism national  identity that was more powerful than the  division between catholic and cross and  would incorporate them both into one  army and into one taxpaying public oh  but then you know the quakers  more than anyone else prove the point  that just even sorry again everyone in  this audience will say the doctrinal  differences between these groups are not  worth fighting and dying over they're  not even worth reading a wikipedia  article over how many of you have ever  read even one wikipedia article about  what the difference is between quakers  and protestants how many they didn't  wear buttons  they they were identifiable by not  having buttons i kid you not the quakers  they were very proud  they had a distinctive style of dress  that came out of their ideology how  different were the quakers from the  puritans how different are protestants  from catholics or episcopalians from  lutheran get into these  everyone in my audience today will say  well this isn't worth  fighting for and so okay  my point is  those trivial differences just a few  centuries ago they didn't just matter  they totally consumed  the body politic  they totally  overwhelmed the parliaments of  england and the 13 colonies for example  and in any given period like within  france  catholic versus protestant i mean again  france is a defined country germany is  much harder to generalize about because  it's a whole bunch of different uh  duchies and countries and so on again  switzerland has its own story here with  zvingly and so on okay this this this  was not a footnote in history of europe  this was a totally overwhelming  all-consuming problem and the hope was  the prayer was  you might say that we could overcome  this  through freedom of conscience freedom of  religion freedom of belief and anyone  here right now can say you know  yeah but all you're talking about is is  the difference between two two religions  so similar that from the perspective of  a japanese tourist they would be  identical  like in the year  1750  if you have someone come from japan to  europe they'd say well all these people  are killing each other and i don't get  it like  you know okay i've been to a catholic  wedding and i've been to a protestant  wedding i've been to a catholic funeral  i've been to a prostitute  yeah what do you got you know  how how is this you know how is this  worth fighting and dying over i'm using  japan as an example but you may or may  not know this in the same period  religions within japan were unbelievably  heterogeneous like i mean you can talk i  mean japanese animism  how much consistency how much  consistency is there from one river  valley to the next river valley in japan  for what they call religion you can call  it shintoism you can use one noun to  describe it but i mean this incredible  diversity in this  you want to talk about buddhism you know  buddhism is a very loose concept for  what's going on in japan at that time  and you could say to some extent now but  anyway you know like these these sorry  melissa and i've talked to this a lot  with the history of china was like look  people talk about taoism like it's one  thing like you know the amount of  diversity and heterogeneousness  incorporated within a category like  taoism like confucianism like legalism  even so-called legalism um so on and so  forth these are you know there's no  comparison to how orthodox and strictly  defined catholicism is and then frankly  how each one of the flavors of  protestantism define itself so narrowly  and hated and despised  all the others so that was that was the  original concept here right  now i always find it's sufficient for me  to just say this to you guys verbally i  can gesture with my hands and not to  provide you with an  actual three-dimensional chart or  computer generated imager or graphic so  it's up to you you can look at the  screen now or you can close your eyes  and imagine along with me as i i  described to you the following  diagram  once you imagine a very large circle  representing facts so our first circle  is  facts the universe  of facts of things that are  merely true  whether or not you perceive them to be  true whether you care about them or  you're indifferent to them or whatever  and within this  there is a much smaller  circle  which i'm going to call  interpretations  and the second circle is entirely within  the first circle right so there's a  subset of facts  that are your  interpretations  of facts  right and already you can imagine your  interpretations of facts are not quite  the same as mine your interpretations of  facts are not quite the same as your own  brothers your own sisters your own  parents your own  grandfather  now within this second circle  there is a smaller circle completely  encompassed  by the first and second  circles  all right  and that circle is opinions  so there are facts  there are your interpretations  of facts and then there are your  opinions  which are on the basis of  your interpretation of facts  and so  and now the final circle in this diagram  which is the smallest of all  there's a little teeny tiny circle  nestled within  your opinions and that is the circle of  beliefs  okay there are things  you believe  what do you believe you believe in  opinions  opinions that exist  on the basis of your interpretation of  facts  facts that exist i'm sorry and then the  interpretations in turn on the basis of  actually existing facts that you  you may or may not may disregard  may ignore at your liberty  right  if someone were to say to you today as  many people do  oh  you can believe  whatever you want to believe  it's the exact opposite of the truth  isn't it  are you allowed to believe  that your daughter  will live a happier life  if you have an arranged marriage  for her  are you allowed to believe that the best  possible life your daughter can have  is to be taken out of school  as soon as possible  to never complete high school and never  go to university never have a career  and to be married to a man  selected by  her parents her grandparents  her aunts or uncle  right  are you free  to believe that do you think other  people  should be free  to believe that  and this is a really difficult one to  talk about  because if you if you're willing to say  no i think  we should coerce people into not  doing that with their daughters  the methods of coercion  become quite difficult  to pin down now this is the year 2022  have you ever heard  ever  in say a newspaper article a radio  report have you ever heard  police this week  presented evidence  from the text messages and emails of the  parents and grandparents proving that  this girl was forced into an arranged  marriage that they'd selected her  husband  that wasn't her  would it be harder to prove  that someone  was the victim of an arranged marriage  put it that way would that be harder to  prove  than proving that someone's a drug  dealer  through text messages emails these kinds  of  of communications  right now as as you may know  most countries now have laws against  child brides they have laws against  arranging a marriage below a certain age  but you might be shocked at just how low  the age is  just how young someone has to be for it  to be treated as a as a crime  in this way okay do you think it's  acceptable for the family to take a  relative education have an arranged  marriage which by the way culturally it  may be bought and paid for it may be a  lot closer to prostitution than you want  to think it is maybe uh pay for do you  think that's acceptable when a girl is  14  16 18 i don't think it's acceptable when  a woman is 22 24 26 i don't think it's  acceptable under under any headache  right but what we're getting at here is  something quite subtle  quite difficult  to enforce and that nobody in the last  200 years has wanted to  want to deal with again i've never heard  any instance of this now  this paradigm  arranged marriage  what religion were you picturing  is the problem here  i'm going to accuse you of being  prejudiced and say you were probably  picturing  muslim families don't you well i'm going  to name a few other religions  that have a problem with arranged  marriage  buddhism  hinduism  judaism  christianity  mormonism  it's not just islam  remarkably  this authoritarian patriarchal pattern  of how women are treated it's recurred  amongst basically all of the most  popular  religions in the world now  it is true if you were to say okay how  many buddhists today  take this seriously in practice this way  as opposed to how many muslims i'm not  claiming these religions are all equal  is this as big a problem even in judaism  as it is in islam there's no no doubt  there's a huge difference between the  extent of this problem in judaism and  christianity as opposed to islam  hinduism  pretty interesting example guys you  might want to do some research about  child marriage and hinduism arrangements  hinduism so on and so forth have you  ever once heard about a trial were  people anywhere in the world where the  parents were brought in and accused of  arranged marriage and the parents said  whoa come on my daughter is pretty ugly  and i was just trying to help introduce  her to some men that she might be the  choice was hers this is what you'd have  to get into if you were going to enforce  a law against this right some people  would be accused of engaged engaging in  arranged marriage and they try to defend  themselves oh no i was just inviting her  to just encouraging my daughter to go on  a date with this guy and give him a  chance i wasn't you know the choice was  hers i wasn't making the decision for  her i didn't actually auction off her  virginity i didn't actually sell her as  a bride or something  right what exactly are the definitions  where does it start to stop how do you  how do you even coercively  change your culture that way again sir  maybe you guys have heard of anywhere in  the world and so someone here mentions  hasidism yes so i was indicating that so  within judaism this exists don't get me  wrong it does i'm saying that explicitly  this does exist within judaism it does  exist in christianity it does exist  within mormonism does exist in buddhism  it is it does but yes i mean what  percentage of jewish families are  implicated in this cultural pattern  today it's certainly less  the scale and depth and extent of it  sure there's a reason why people  by default probably are picturing this  as a muslim problem some people  depending on your background you might  have thought of a uh you might have  thought as a hindu okay here's the  question i want to ask you  i open this video by really explaining  to you at some length that we are not  angels by virtue of being  atheist we're not extraordinarily  intelligent we're not even well informed  you know this is something simple but  not necessarily easy to do it brings us  together that we have in common  as atheists um  how many people  if they were raised as  secular atheists  with modern scientific values how many  would reinvent the wheel  how many would  devise  a system of oppressive patriarchy  involving  arranged marriage  and child marriage  now i am not going to say to you that  zero atheists would do this  i would say  incredibly stupid  incredibly evil people  would do this in the absence of religion  but in the presence of religion  you can be in a society where the vast  majority of people are doing where it's  a mass phenomenon where it's the default  culturally accepted  behavior that's what's so extraordinary  about religion so i can repeat this now  very briefly with  circumcision  all right  how many people if they were born with  secular atheist anti-religious  anti-clerical modern attitudes how many  people would get the idea you know what  i need some kind of  of age ceremony i need some way to mark  the difference between being a boy  and a man just you know  paying a surgeon to cut off part of my  penis to remove 60 of the nerve endings  in my penis can you imagine  someone in the absence of religion  deciding to do this deciding to mark the  difference between childhood and manhood  by  undergoing  circumcision an incredibly small number  of atheists  incredibly stupid or incredibly evil  could do this to themselves or could do  this to their own  sons  right  but the power of religion is that it  makes it the unquestioned  default  throughout society now i can say the  same about eating meat  i can say the same about animal  sacrifice i can say the same about  drinking alcohol  it seems that there is no evil that  cannot be  rationalized and popularized and taken  on coercive force  through  religion and although you know i  dutifully opened this video by  criticizing my own side and pointing to  the fact that atheists are  fallible right we now live in a world  where we have to question right  we have to question  the extent to which we could make  progress  just by pulling people back  from this  tiny circle  of beliefs from living within  the sphere  of belief  and perceiving  what's in that sphere as more  real  than any fact to instead pull them back  to recognizing  these are merely my opinions  and these inter these opinions  are based on a finite and imperfect set  of interpretations of a finite and  imperfect selection  of facts that's the breakthrough we're  capable of  as a human species the vast majority of  people can't live  without beliefs but they can learn to  regard those beliefs as nothing but  opinions they happen to be especially  passionate about they can learn to  in this sense undermine or overcome  belief and to not have dogmatic  attitudes to not have religious  attitudes about anything  in their lives it's a tremendously  important form of progress and even if  we acknowledge atheists can become  communists and it happen on a huge scale  atheists can be racist atheists can be  homophobic atheists can be terrible  people in myriad ways nevertheless right  i don't think  i'm being optimistic when i say that  atheists  cannot  reinvent the darkness of the dark ages  atheists will not  revert to  arranged marriage child marriage  circumcision  so on and so forth  we live in a society now  that as a kind of echo  or an inheritance  of the  internecine wars between catholic and  protestant right  dogmatically asserts this notion  of  freedom of religion  freedom of belief so much so  that we say  when china  puts muslims into a  re-education camp  that it's a crime against humanity  okay i want to talk to you about camps  for just one second here i've talked  about camps  on the channel before  when christians in the united states of  america  have a gay son or a lesbian daughter  what do those christians do  try to force their kids to become  straight  straight acting heteronormative  they send them to a camp  they send them  to a re-education camp  and we don't seem to regard this  as a violation of their human rights  we seem to regard  religion  as something innate  and inalienable  when it suits us that prejudice against  religion  is treated like prejudice against a skin  color is therefore taboo and fat and  evil and wrong right  um  how do mormons  ensure that their kids grow up as good  little mormons how do lutherans ensure  that their kids grow up as  good little lutherans  they send them to a camp  they send them  to bible camp they send them to  brainwashing camp and i have made  youtube videos in the past showing you  what these camps look like and it's  horrifying  even the catholic ones when i was when i  was putting together those video clips  looking at all these different religious  camps i was expecting the catholic camps  to be less horrifying i thought well  come on the catholics don't take this  stuff seriously  the catholic camps were arguably the  most horrifying of all it was  unbelievable the indoctrination the  brainwashing the real  real ritual inculcation of belief and  superstition and irrationality and  stupidity into children one generation  after another in  camps  yes to some extent this happens in  schools every day if your kid goes to a  catholic school but i think there is  something especially  tangible like it's not just symbolic the  significance of these camps it gives you  a really  tangible  way to visualize what this process is of  one generation bullying another  to come into conformity with their  fundamentally stupid ignorant evil and  wrong preconceptions and to hold on to  these beliefs and to think that those  beliefs are more real than facts that  they don't come from a human being's  interpretations and opinions  but that they've been handed down by god  or materialized magically you know  uh so and so forth now  when i was a kid  [Laughter]  uh  i saw my own family tear itself apart  over israel the politics of israel  totally terror  bitter vicious hatred between people and  my families because they're different  positions in israel this relates to many  different things in this uh video even  though everyone involved was an atheist  who were people who were jewish  as an ethnic category but all these  people in these  bitterly contested discussions and  people who didn't talk to each other for  years and hated each other and all this  stuff and over  israel over israeli politics  you know what  jewish families do to try to ensure that  their kids grow up zionist  meeting pro-israel  they send them to a camp  and i met and i talked to kids  who told me how thrilled they were  to use a machine gun  at that camp  you take a little kid who's played video  games said hey  back then the number one most popular  gun in video games and  comic books and stuff it was just the  the gun that people that was cool was  called the uzi now you know this you  said i mean there's a rapper recently  with that nickname it's a little bit old  hat now  it's an israeli gun guys you may not  know this it's the israeli army and  sorry to learn how to use an uzi so you  take a kid  and in america too i mean each state's a  little bit different but kids are  already shooting hunting rifles at age  12 and stuff  12 14  from state to state kids are using guns  with with adult supervision you take a  kid  and you put a gun in their hand  and you show them what it's like to fire  an uzi and then they literally go home  and watch cartoons like superhero  cartoons and they read comic books and  they see that gun and they know they see  it in action movies too arnold  schwarzenegger movies whatever's  powerful they know what it's like to  hold that gun and hear and feel the  bullets  coming out of it okay god isn't real or  that that power trip is this really  influences  [Laughter]  little  little kids all right and i'm sure i'm  sure we could talk about this under  other headings i know there are families  that they want to they want their son to  be a hunter because this father and  grandfather then they go and they hold a  gun and they shoot a deer you know  whatever it may be  um  i remember one guy  who was um  he was jewish to me he didn't look  jewish i was surprised i thought he was  jewish i remember he started telling me  about the the  peculiar  rush he felt when firing tracer bullets  so these are bullets that have um  phosphorus in them so that when you fire  the bullet you know normally bullet  travels a bit faster than the human eye  can really see  you get to see this  you know illuminated trace this trail  behind it so you can see exactly the  angle you fire the the bullet at so you  can imagine this is useful for improving  your aim  this is a this is a kid  knows it's like the whole fire or a gun  and to be told  what are they told  you were born special  one of god's  chosen people  all right  um  muslims  are putting their kids into camps  all right christians are putting their  kids into camps  mormons  are putting their kids in the camps  hindus  are putting their kids into into camps  you guys might not have seen this i did  have you seen the videos  about some of those ukrainian camps  some of those right-wing ukrainian camps  all right there are a lot of people  there a lot of people organizing  camps  all right  so what is it exactly  that we are today  criticizing  china for  what is it exactly  that china is doing wrong  in  xinjiang  and how long is it going to be  before we make hypocrites  of ourselves  by doing approximately or exactly  the same thing  i'm going to pause  guys now 55 minutes  i could do a mic drop  right now  melissa's been sitting off camera i want  to give melissa a chance to chit-chat  with me if you want to you can sit down  as you want you can you can ask a  question if any of you in the audience  have uh have anything  tremendously intelligent to say  you can say it now and i'll pay i'll pay  more attention  more attention than usual  there have been some comments here i can  i can reply to uh from the last hour  um  now look you know  different levels to this thing so  melissa's  i can see she's  see she's rubbing the sticks together to  come up with a couple with a spark it's  still pressurized you could say anything  you could say you could say nothing um  what do people mean when they say you  can believe anything  you want  all right what do people mean  today in the 21st century  all they mean is that they don't give a  [ __ ] about you  that they don't care  like if someone is vegan  and they say to you as a meat-eater hey  you can believe whatever the [ __ ] you  want it's really like saying you can go  to hell like i just i don't care about  you  doesn't mean they don't care about the  animals you're killing doesn't mean they  don't care about the damage you're doing  to the climate doesn't mean they don't  care about heart attacks and all the  terrible diseases that come there are a  whole lot of things they care about  but not you you can go [ __ ] yourself  that's what it means when people say you  can believe it in the in the 21st  century but what's interesting is that  is the final and most degenerate form  of an idea  that just a few generations ago  meant something very different  what it meant was that in the  autobiography  of ben franklin  that he took  really seriously the fact that he was in  a colony  where he had to get catholics and  protestants to work together in fighting  against spain and fighting against  france  and fighting against quote-unquote the  indians native americans and that he had  to take really seriously and manage his  relations with the quakers you know  which you can read about you can read it  from his perspective that that was his  idea of a society was with that kind of  pluralism and when they said you can  believe whatever you want to believe you  have freedom of conscience etc all they  really meant was there's just enough  tolerance here  that we're not going back to the way  things were under  charles v emperor of europe the way  things were before the protestant  reformation that there's this this way  forward of a little bit of wiggle room  and enlightenment did they have any  tolerance for the religion of the  indigenous american people no non-zero  did they have any tolerance for the  religions of the african people who  still had their own religion when they  came over no none zero was this very  limited  range of tolerance and what i'm inviting  you guys to think about a little bit is  how limited  the range of tolerance is in our times  also if we're really being honest about  it  um  again  very briefly  i don't see any reason  why we should tolerate circumcision male  or female  what is the argument in favor  of tolerance of that and again i'm being  honest with you guys here this one i'm  about to say it's even more unpopular  that's already unpopular  i don't see any reason to tolerate  uh gambling  i just don't see the benefit of letting  people lose their money  gambling at a casino the vast majority  of people disagree with my i realize  what i'm saying here is is unpopular  there are some evils that there's a  point in in tolerating you know if to  give an example i really take this  seriously now we've been we've been  through this for years together guys  you've been watching my channel okay  there is a reason  to tolerate racism  if you if you don't let people  say what they really think on twitter  and on youtube and on like how are we  supposed to make progress when you  silence and censor the racists right  like that i've seen that freedom of  speech come and go on the internet i was  myself attacked by racists and  anti-semites whenever i'm you know i'm  ethnically jewish i've really enjoyed  that but like  i'm just saying you can't say there's no  point in allowing racist people to have  freedom of speech there is a point there  is benefit but some kinds of tolerance  right  what are we talking about yo you want  more of it yeah sure  i was thinking of an example that you've  actually already made videos about so  it's  something that  was uh on my mind as we were talking  about this because  it's not in every religion i don't i at  least i've never heard about it in  hinduism or buddhism but uh it is in  certain religions the the problem of  cousins and marriage yes and  interbreeding and this  sorry yeah yeah um that this is a real  significant problem i saw some video  from a  the a countryside in in in turkey in the  country of turkey  uh where a family  of  the husband and wife were cousins and  some of the children turned out okay but  some turned out  horribly informed  with severe mental disabilities yeah  severely [ __ ] so this is a  extreme you know example  but  in any case this should be banned that  should be out while there should be no  tolerance for this um  so at what point you know do you say  that this is completely intolerable  and who gets to who gets to say so babe  i thought about that  in my earlier  monologue or discussion under under a  different headache this isn't  disagreeing with you it's just putting  in a different context  when i mentioned for example a black  woman  who is racist against  couples that intermarry so a mixed-race  couple you know where that's the  peculiar form of bigotry is specific not  racism in general but specifically  hostility to miscegenation  or you know asian men  asian men and white women or white men  and asian women that that specific form  of racism you know what's interesting  about that is that if you have  scientific attitudes  you understand that the real problem is  inbreeding the real like  scientifically inbreeding is a problem  scientifically marrying your cousin is a  problem and you know i'm not saying that  um  exoticized foreigners that's necessarily  the best person you can marry you know  you've got to make decisions in  particular cases  but  if you are attracted to people who are  exotic estranged you  there is that reassurance at least  you're not marrying your own cousin at  least you're not you're not gonna you  know uh you you're not gonna have these  these problems of inbreeding so that is  one where you can't say science is  neutral or science is indifferent  um science is fundamentally in favor of  you know and yeah it's like the truth  based example where right there's just  it doesn't matter if you believe in  inbreeding right good or bad it's  scientifically it's it's bad so well  right right right quick but but to be  fair  you know  in the year 1950 still  most people believed in eugenics and  they believed that science proved the  opposite right and you know i mean the  the the world war ii period and so on  but you know even you go back to say the  1890s  um which is very much the lead up  ideologically to world war ii there was  this whole blossoming pseudoscience of  eugenics that was regarded as scientific  certainty that basically you know kind  of justified not just racism also a lot  of classism a lot of it was kind of  hating on poor people as if poor people  are genetically inferior in this kind of  thing and breeding between the classes  aristocratic attitudes about about  marriage and breeding oh and yeah  aristocratic attitudes that also links  to arranged marriage and these things  yeah um  and you know just to kind of prescribe  one cure to many ailments because talk  about different manifestations the  religious mentality here  but you know  what if you could have the detachment to  regard your beliefs  as just the kind of opinion that you're  right  for all of them for all examples whether  it's racism or homophobia or  you know inbreeding or  yeah toothpaste like what if  you know and that's  that's the difference well i i came to  the difference between us on them well  that's the difference between me and  them you know  as a member of the audience you have to  ask yourself if you've really got this  this kind of radical skepticism and come  with me or not cool yeah i liked this  this example or this uh demonstration  that you made with the different series  of circles that yeah interlock  um you know  i heard an intro an interview recently  with a woman who had had 10 children  and  right her  [Music]  part of her reasoning was i never want  anyone to tell me what how many children  i can have right you know and uh  you can listen to other women who have  had so many children and you know they  deal with a lot of prejudice from people  around them they think  uh you know you're a redneck you're a  pumpkin that's kind of right  how is it possible to provide  the appropriate level of child rearing  for that many children it's just it's  hard to believe that any woman can can  really  give a good uh upbringing to 10 children  uh but still um you know at a certain  point you know at what point does it  become irresponsible and usually it has  to do with religion i mean typically yes  religious uh households have more  children so yeah this is this is also a  factor with uh  i mean us being vegan i know  overpopulation is not really the problem  we we know that if everybody had a vegan  diet  the planet could sustain a population of  seven billion people right um  but given that  most people are not vegan most people  are consuming meat overpopulation is a  problem and it's going to destroy the  planet  yes yeah if everybody continues eating  the diet that they have okay do you want  about you see sure uh i'll just say you  know  i had i could only use so many examples  in a one hour  monologue but you know when i choose  that kind of example when you talk about  the situation of a woman who is being  put into an arranged marriage and having  kids and is not even completing high  school and not going to university and  can't have some other career  sure overpopulation is a factor and  these things can be talked about um  but you know for me this is about the  meaning of life  and  again you know if anyone disagrees come  at me bro  but i do not think a woman can have a  meaningful life who has an arranged  marriage at age 14.  and there were people who have arranged  marriage earlier than 14 there are and  again if you just go back a few  centuries in europe it wasn't it wasn't  that common but it existed there was a  there was a certain percentage of  a certain percentage of marriages were  you know uh this type of ranged marriage  at a shockingly early age  um you can read the autobiographies of  people who went through it  you know  um  even if it were theoretically possible  for a woman who wears a veil and who has  an arranged marriage and it drops out of  school yeah theoretically she can still  read thucydides she can still read her  hondas theoretically she can still  develop her intellect and someone but  you know  in every  this is as ridiculous as saying that a  person could be put in prison at age 14  like someone who's falsely accused of  murder and put in prison at 14 which  happens and they could still have a  wonderful life you know well yes you you  could you know theoretically your life  in prison could have been better than  your life outside of prison  but this kind of theorizing um  you know it fails to rationalize it  fails to justify what we are looking at  which is fundamentally snuffing out a  human being's intellectual potential  snuffing of the possibility that they'll  have a meaningful life now the counter  argument which i take seriously a lot of  people would just dismiss it is well if  you give women freedom  if you let them  wait to get married till they're 35  years old or whenever they choose to  which  may be 35 years old  you know if you give women all of these  freedoms well  what percentage of them are going to  become strippers what percentage of them  are going to be on only fans and so on  a lot  you know like a lot like you know i i um  i i i said in response to a comment from  the audience recently someone was  talking about social harmony i don't  think harmony is the purpose of society  i don't think having a peaceful society  is is really what i want you know um you  know the taliban  created sustained a harmonious society  that doesn't really interest me you know  it is true if you give women this kind  of freedom there will be many broken  hearts and many bad decisions made and  there and  women will make particular types of  decisions that would be impossible for  them to make in a more repressive  society where instead they're they're uh  sold off as a bro they have arranged  marriage and so on and so forth it  certainly does you know change change  the nature of those things and i think  it's important to accept you know like i  know it seems ridiculous but you can  really say democracy entails pornography  like you can't have one without the  other when you have democracy you have  political equality for women and freedom  and opportunity some women are going to  get involved with pornography whether  that's only fans or magazines or or what  have you some women are going to  prostitute themselves even in the most  idealized egalitarian future you can you  can conceptualize so i'm just saying i  don't dismiss that in a in a catty way  but i i'm i i'm making my argument not  on the basis it's a totally good point  by the way overpopulation and what that  entails and by the way guys the  demographics are very well traced for  the modern state of israel  how many children do conservative jews  have and the different definitions of  how conservative and how many children  do  people with modern secular attitudes  have whether they identify as atheists  or as reformed jewish or one of the more  one more liberal liberal and libertine  sects yeah guess what it's pretty  consistent the religious maniacs  the women get married  younger  they have lower levels of education they  have more children and  year by year the percentage of israel  that is comprised of so-called heredity  uh jewish people and again you can get  into what is the exact definition of  orthodox already but the percentage of  israelis who are religious fanatics it  is increasing which is say that the  people who are more free thinking and  secular modern they are they're having  fewer children so anyway um an extreme  example though though sorry  yeah just say it i mean another thing  i'm sorry  i'll just add another thing that woman  said was  if one room in my house is lit by one  light bulb it doesn't matter how many  people are in the room it's still the  same light bulb yeah so that that is her  belief like she's like  it was such a reduction yeah it was just  so silly you know because she had just  gotten done talking about how much food  the whole family  you know having 10 children it's  ridiculous  like  um so you may have this belief  at some point  at some point there are so many people  in the room that i am in someone else's  shadow  that is my refutation  [Laughter]  do you know that you know the quiver  full movement  um i think you've told me about it  it's just an easy one to um to google  it's not that popular a religious  segment but there are religious people  who believe in having the greatest  number of children possible and i think  that's a great example of how religion  just immediately destroys any  possibility of a meaningful life for at  least the woman and her and her  daughters how meaningful life that men  can have it's  it's just it's just less oppressive for  men but it's still pretty oppressive for  the men and so on yeah  yeah i know i just i just wanted to say  you know reiterate that i i do really  appreciate this like you know your  belief that  you should have as many children as you  possibly can you know uh to  whatever for whatever you believe the  reason is you know like why why it is  that you believe that's the right thing  to do  um yes it's an opinion based on  sorry remind me  anyway so opinion based on your  interpretation of that yeah  right well you're in turn based on facts  yes thank you okay  sorry okay  anyway yeah we have some people who are  culturally hindu in the audience as you  guys know i think there are different  reasons why the message the unpopular  message i'm sharing on this channel is  more appealing to hindus than  any other demographic  i have several viewers now who are  spanish speakers in south america think  about how hard it is to accept this for  someone in brazil or colombia or what  have you  but it was someone who was culturally  hindu comments that yes arranged  marriage is is huge among hindus even  among the most highly educated people  you will find  um and and i would say this before i put  emphasis on questioning  how would you enforce a law against that  i'm insinuating that probably it would  look something like  the re-education camps in xinjiang like  i don't think the enforcement really  would be  sitting back and intercepting text  messages and emails and then arresting  the parents probably would have to be  something like um  something like the re-education camps in  in sydney  um  but this is the thing i want to  emphasize now  the people who practice arranged  marriage  what do they believe in  it's not as simple as saying god  and by the way there is no text you can  pull out of the bible and this is not  you can say oh well look at the ten  commandments like commandment number  eight is therefore a range of marriage  you know  they believe  this is for the best  you know but people can believe that  that can be that can be something they  believe is more real than an opinion  more real than an interpretation of fact  more real than a fact it becomes a a  belief i mean again some of you know  what i'm talking about right away some  of you don't if you were around  traditional racists from the american  south the segregated south of the united  states of america  what they'd always say about relations  between black people and white people so  it's for the best you know it's for the  best that they don't get to go to the  same college as we go to it's for  and they really believe that they really  believe it's it's for  the best you know  but but  how  how is it going to change you know how  do you change someone's belief that's so  nebulous right like there i hate telling  this there is a sense in which i can  prove to you god doesn't exist if we pin  down your definition of god you know  what i mean we can kind of prove that  whether or not toothpaste works like  there are things we can prove right  whether or not the earth is flat or the  earth is round can we get this  susceptible to proof and falsifiability  and death knowledge and certainty right  but that kind of belief the belief that  arranged marriages  is for the best and look we could say  the same thing all again with cousin  marriage and again i made videos with  about people who think that marrying one  person to their cousin that's like for  the family as a whole is is for the best  right so you know how how do you  overcome that  and um  yeah very often for people who are  in this struggle it's not even clear  what it is they're arguing you should or  shouldn't believe it right  so here's here's a comment from martin  for you  um  and martin's been here i remember the  name from several other live streams so  quote  he or she says i assume this is a man  but it could be martina we don't know  quote lies are functional and even good  if they keep society functioning and  avoiding its self-destruction  that's why atheism and nihilism  shouldn't become mainstream or taken  seriously by the majority of the  population  so  you know  martin  have you been to a muslim majority  country  i'm going to take an example of a muslim  country i have v2 i have been would you  live in malaysia  for just two weeks  and malaysia is considered moderate in  its its form of islam malaysia is not  saudi arabia malaysia is not afghanistan  right could you spend just two weeks in  malaysia  and still believe what you've just said  you believe  i don't think you could i think after  two weeks you think it was intolerable  and you would completely recant and  throw away this notion that as you say  quote-unquote lies are functional  and even good  all right now  we can extend this further could you  spend two weeks in afghanistan  could you spend two weeks in  in saudi arabia you know  um  and i've got to push a little bit  further here his phrasing is telling he  says  if  if they keep society functioning  and avoiding its self-destruction  what if you lived in malaysia for two  years  what if you lived in saudi arabia for  two years what if you lived in  afghanistan for two years at some point  don't you think you might start to feel  that the truth is so important  the difference between truth and lies  is so important  that it would really be quite worthwhile  for society to shut down  to stop functioning that it would be a  good thing for this particular society  to  self-destruct  precisely so that it could make the  transition  from living a lie  to some kind  of more healthy engagement  with the truth  whether you regard that  as destructive  or creative  is very much  in the eye of the beholder  what one person would see as the  destruction of saudi arabia  someone else would see as its salvation  a revolution  that tears down  the religious tyranny  of saudi arabia of afghanistan or even a  more moderate muslim country like you  know  malaysia  some people  some people would see that as  self-destruction  not me  the role of the nihilist  and the role of the true atheist  in my opinion as a dissident  intellectual in society is to  perpetually work toward  that great  rectification  it's to work toward  writing a new constitution  not just once and for all time but in my  opinion  in every generation  again and again  attacking  undermining overcoming  the myths the lies that as you say  keep society functioning as i say that  perpetuate  you know society as you  as you know it right pointing the way  leading the way whether  creatively or  destructively  toward the end  of the darkness  of the dark ages  the year is 2022.  the dark ages are not  over  yet